PREPRINT. Definitive version published in Science Robotics Vol. 6, Issue 54 on May 26, 2021, DOI: 10.1126/scirobotics.abi4667

SCIENCE ROBOTICS | FOCUS
ROBOTIC MANIPULATION

Copyright © 2021

The unstable queen: Uncertainty, mechanics,
and tactile feedback

The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim

Alberto Rodriguez

to original U.S.
Government Works

Tactile feedback is a natural pathway to robot dexterity in unstructured settings.

Uncertainty is at the core of robotic manipulation. Mason (1) recalled trying to program
a robot to repeatedly pick up and put down
a queen chess piece. When grasped from
the top, the queen would end up falling after
five or six pick-and-place cycles. The simple
act of grasping and placing seemed to turn
the queen “unstable.” But this did not happen
when the robot grasped the queen from the side.
Mason’s insight was to consider uncer-

Using passive mechanical feedback, without sensors, is quite extended in industry. It
makes sense; it leads to simple, efficient,
elegant, and responsive solutions, by specializing to the task. Probably the most
impactful and inspirational examples are the
use of vibratory bowl feeders for automatic
part orienting and the use of passive Remote
Center of Compliance devices for automatic
alignment in insertion tasks.

tainty in the mechanics of contact and how
the natural dynamics of physical interaction
can be exploited to tame that uncertainty.

This philosophy has motivated the development of many naturally stable manipulation
strategies, for example, based on tray-tilting

TACTILE FEEDBACK
Staying within the control perspective, sometimes it can be more effective to use a sensor-

tion, without the need of sensing, define a

negative passive feedback loop that regulates the task. In the case of the unstable
queen, instead, the process of grasping and
placing from the top defines a positive feedback loop that destabilizes the alignment of
queen and gripper.

that, “There has been a longstanding and
widely held expectation that tactile sensors
would have a major impact on industrial robotics and automation. However, this promise has not been realized, and few, if any,

or push-grasping (5) among many others.
These strategies exploit natural invariances

in the dynamics of manipulation, ensuring
that they are used to reduce task errors. From
a control perspective, we would say that in
those strategies the dynamics of manipula-

settings that are structured or are suscepti-

ble to being structured might not be the
most straightforward application for tactile
feedback. The corollary is that, in unstruc-

based feedback loop than a mechanical
one—for example, using an optical encoder
and a PID loop to control the speed of an
engine or actuator instead of a mechanical
governor. It is then natural to ask when it
would be a good idea to use a sensor instead
of mechanical feedback in manipulation
control loops.
In a review on the state of the art on the

(2), squeeze-grasping (3), stable-pushing (4),

tactile sensors can be found in factory-based
applications.” He goes on to justify that it is
the structured nature of many industrial
settings that reduces the potential benefits
from the flexibility that tactile feedback provides. If sufficiently structured, highly engineered solutions will always win, so industrial

use of tactile feedback, Lee (6) pointed out

tured settings, solutions that are designed to
exploit the natural dynamics of manipulation will have a harder time.
The ability to deal with this type of unstructured uncertainty, such as when carefully
reorienting an unknown grasped object or
when controlling the forceful grasp on an
oddly shaped handle, is key to building flexible manipulation systems. In these unstructured settings, with uncertain or unknown
geometries, materials, and configurations,

tactile feedback provides a natural means to
regulate manipulation control loops. An
emerging class of tactile sensors (7) collocated
at the frictional contact surfaces of a robot
(Fig. 1) provide accurate, dense, and timely
feedback on the same variables that we use to
model the mechanics of contact: spatial distributions of contact geometry and of contact
forces, as well as the events captured by
their derivatives, such as slip or making/
breaking contact.

BUT WHAT MANIPULATION CONTROL
LOOPS DO WE NEED TO REGULATE?

Fig. 1. Grasp of a queen chess piece making an edge contact with the board. Tactile sensors GelSlim (7) capture
feedback ofthe physical interaction and estimate shape, slip, pressure, and shear force distributions.

The mechanics of frictional contact,
even the approximations we commonly
use in robotics, lead to complex dynamic
systems that are underactuated and hybrid and consequently difficult to control.
I believe a key role of tactile feedback, if
not its key role, is to regulate manipulation around states that benefit from simpler dynamics.

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. Email: albertor@mit.edu

tactile sensing in robotic manipulation:

Tactile feedback

Pressure

Shear force

Howe (8) writes in an early review on

Rodriguez, Sci. Robot. 6, eabi4667 (2021)

26 May 2021

1of2

PREPRINT. Definitive version published in Science Robotics Vol. 6, Issue 54 on May 26, 2021, DOI: 10.1126/scirobotics.abi4667

SCIENCE ROBOTICS | FOCUS
“Human dexterity
is a marvelous thing: People can grasp a wide variety of shapes and
sizes, perform complex tasks, and switch
between grasps in response to changing task
requirements...in large measure, this control capability is founded on tactile and force
sensing, especially the ability to sense conditions at the finger-object contact.” These
contact conditions that Howe refers to include
contact modes such as making and breaking
contact, rolling, or sliding.
I conjecture that regulating contact
modes is one primary way by which tactile
feedback control can simplify the dynamics
of contact, for example, by enforcing that contacts are maintained/released or by preventing/
regulating slip. The principle is to think of
tactile feedback control loops as responsible for forcing contacts to behave more like
the ideal models that we then use for simulation and planning. We have recently shown
the use of regulated contact modes to facilitate dexterous manipulation of rigid and
deformable objects with sticking (9) and
sliding (10) contacts.

to observe the interaction firsthand through
tactile feedback is matched with the challenge of adapting to an uncertain environment that can be fixed, or can be moving, or
can be movable. This problem is related to
skills like probing, contour following, or
shared grasping.
2) Control of a multiple-contact configuration. Maintaining a contact mode in a
multi-contact formation, for example, in
the grasp of an uncertain or unknown object. Here the challenge is to regulate modes
that involve the internal forces in a forceful
stable grasp or modes involving the simultaneous sticking/sliding of contacts in fine object manipulation.
3) Control of an external contact. Maintaining a contact mode at the interaction

between a grasped object and its environment—
for example, the contact between the unstable
queen and the chess board. The challenge
now is in controlling an unsensed contact,
indirectly through feedback at the sensed contacts at the grasp. This problem is related to
skills like placing an object, guiding an in-

robotics includes many unstructured settings such as agriculture, health care, or
home service, where tactile feedback can
help close the gap.
REFERENCES
1.

Robotics Seminar (5 April 2019); https://youtu.be/

LfWiBdOc2FI?t=620.
2.

Below I list three tactile-feedback control
problems aimed at addressing the absence
of accurate models of geometries, materials,
or configurations:

1) Control of a single contact. Maintaining
a contact mode (e.g., stick, slip, or desired

pressure distribution) between a robot finger and its environment. The opportunity

Rodriguez, Sci. Robot. 6, eabi4667 (2021)

26 May 2021

In summary, a key role of tactile feedback in manipulation is to simplify the dynamics of frictional contact. Robots can do
this by regulating contact modes, for example, by enforcing that contacts slip or slide
when they are supposed to. This improves
our ability to simulate and plan complex
dexterous manipulation. While the efficiency of mechanical feedback is desirable in
many structured applications, the promise of

M.A. Erdmann, M.T. Mason, An exploration
of sensorless manipulation. /EEE
J. Robot. Autom. 4,

369-379 (1988).
3. K. Goldberg, Orienting polygonal parts without sensors.
Algorithmica 10, 201-225 (1993).
4.

K.M.Lynch, M. T. Mason, Stable pushing: Mechanics,

controllability, and planning. Int. J. Robot. Res. 15,
533-556 (1996).
5. M. Dogar, S. Srinivasa, A framework for pushgrasping in clutter, in Robotics: Science and Systems
(RSS) (2011).
6.

M.H. Lee, Tactile sensing: New directions, new
challenges. Int. J. Robot. Res. 19, 636-643 (2000).

7. \. Taylor, S. Dong and A. Rodriguez, GelSlim 3.0:
High-resolution measurement of shape, force and slip
in a compact tactile-sensing finger, https://arxiv.org/
abs/2103.12269 (2021).
8.

R. Howe, Tactile sensing and control of robotic
manipulation.
Adv. Robot. 8, 245-261 (1993).

9.

F.R.Hogan, J. Ballester, S. Dong, A. Rodriguez, Tactile

dexterity: Manipulation primitives with tactile feedback,
in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and

sertion, or using a tool.

THREE TACTILE CONTROL PROBLEMS

M. Mason, Models of robotic manipulation, MIT

Automation (ICRA), Paris, France, 31 May to 31 August

2020, pp. 8863-8869.
10.

Y. She, S. Dong, S. Wang, N. Sunil, A. Rodriguez and
E. Adelson, Cable manipulation with a tactile-

reactive gripper, in Robotics: Science and Systems
(RSS) (2020).

10.1126/scirobotics.abi4667
Citation: A. Rodriguez, The unstable queen: Uncertainty,
mechanics, and tactile feedback. Sci. Robot. 6, eabi4667 (2021).

2 of2

